Hello, my name is Chelsea Parlette-Pellariti and today I want to talk to you about building
machine learning web apps using Shiny for Python.
Now it sounds like you heard a little bit about this before, of course, from all the
other wonderful Shiny talks we have, but just to review, Shiny for Python is a tool that
allows you to build interactive, reactive, and scalable web apps that just work with
the already rich machine learning ecosystem that exists in Python.
So throughout this talk, I'm going to share some examples of how I've used Shiny for Python
in my machine learning workflow, and I just want you to ask yourself, where could Shiny
for Python fit into your machine learning workflow?
Now I'm not coming to you today as a developer who could give an incredibly complex and detailed
talk about the inner workings of Shiny for Python and exactly how it's implemented.
Rather, I'm coming to you as a Shiny for Python user, and I want to tell you what that experience
is like so that you can see if it's something that you want to implement in your own workflow.
So why am I giving you this talk if I'm not a Shiny for Python developer?
Well, let me set the scene.
So it's last year before our StudioConf, and none of you knew that Shiny for Python was
going to be announced, but I did because I spent the summer working with the developer
team to build apps and create educational materials to help people learn how to use
Shiny for Python.
In fact, if you go to the Shiny for Python front page, you might see one of my apps on
that front page, like this one.
But more than that, I'm a professor.
And while a lot of you probably don't spend your day-to-day time in front of dozens of
undergrads, I think as data people, a huge part of what we do is teach.
Because what is teaching but explaining complicated, complex, and difficult topics in a way that
is easily digestible?
And I found through my teaching that Shiny for Python apps really helped me accomplish
that goal of communicating difficult things in an easily digestible way.
For instance, here's an example of an app that I use in my deep learning class.
This is demonstrating a certain method that goes with computer vision models that basically
tells you what about an image was important to the computer vision model in classifying
that image.
So here we see a picture of some elephants, and you can see that the model thinks that
these are elephants.
And on the right, you get a heat map showing you exactly what pixels were important in
making that classification of elephant.
And here you can see it's things that make sense, right, like ears and trunks.
And using Shiny for Python apps allows me to get my students involved and to interact
with the material that we're learning.
Now Shiny as a framework is not new.
As a lot of you know, Shiny came out in 2012 for R. And in the next about 10 years, it
has become a beloved tool for making web apps in the R community.
Now last year, Shiny for Python was announced, and I think that just means that the community
of people that is about to fall in love with Shiny just expanded.
Now I mentioned before that I'm a professor, but if you force me to put a label on myself,
I would call myself a statistician.
So as you can imagine, I fell in love with R and all its associated tools very early
in my career.
But I currently teach in an engineering department, which means I am forced to teach all of my
classes in Python.
The prereqs are in Python.
The classes after mine are in Python.
And just to be honest, a lot of my students are more comfortable in Python.
And I think that might be relatable to a lot of you, maybe your web developers, your boss,
your whole team, your engineers, someone else uses Python.
And so now you have to.
And the beauty of Shiny for Python is that we can use the Shiny framework, which a lot
of us may have fallen in love with when we were using it in R, and we can leverage it
with all of the power that Python has.
And I joke a little bit about being forced to teach in Python, but I have to admit, Python
has a great industry standard, very rich ecosystem of machine learning packages like scikit-learn,
TensorFlow, Keras, and Pandas.
And now we can leverage the power of these very established machine learning packages
with the Shiny framework using Shiny for Python.
So I want to tell you about three different times you might want to use Shiny for Python
in your machine learning workflow.
And the first time is when you need interactivity.
Now, as a professor, I know that interactivity is key to deep understanding.
Look, sometimes your boss or the CEO just wants a one-line memo telling them what to do,
or they want a Word document with the information that you have found.
But in cases where deep understanding is the goal, interactivity is going to be key for that.
And Shiny for Python can provide that interactivity for you.
For instance, here's an example of an app that I use with my students to teach them
about the differences between different classification models.
As you can see on the screen, there's a bunch of different things that my students can change.
They can change the data set they're looking at,
and they can change different hyperparameters for our various models.
Those are then going to interact with the graphs that are shown on the web page,
and it allows them to explore and ask questions about these different classification models,
and therefore engage and get a deeper understanding
of how these models make classifications differently.
Another app that I use is this app that helps you look at and assess
model calibration and the fairness of different models.
Especially with this topic, it's really important if you want people to have a deep understanding
to let them ask and then answer their own questions as they engage and as they get curious.
And that's what interactivity through a Shiny for Python app allows you to do.
And we've seen apps like this before.
This is another one that I use to explain item response theory models.
And you can see it has your typical input sliders that affect a graph.
But another thing that I really love is we don't just have to change
graphs in response to user input.
For instance, in this app, the actual text explanation of the model
dynamically updates as the users change their different parameters.
This again allows them to get curious, ask questions about what happens when
you change this parameter or that one, and then get the answers to their questions.
So where might you have interactivity in your workflow?
Well, in my humble opinion, it is in the three Ds.
The first one is description.
So when you have a new data set or you're trying to answer a new question,
you might want to build a tool that allows your co-workers or your shareholders
to explore the data and, like I mentioned before,
ask and answer their own questions as they get curious about it.
You can use Shiny for Python to build a very nice, well-working,
no-code exploratory data analysis app that allows people to filter,
plot, and summarize their data as they explore it.
The second D is in development.
As you're building models or comparing models,
you can use Shiny for Python at all stages of that process.
For instance, you could even build a Shiny app that helps people on your team
build an actual machine learning model.
Or you can use it as a way to compare different models
as you're trying to decide what is going to get put in production.
Or even do something like a multiverse analysis
in which you look at the effect of different modeling choices
and how it might impact the inferences or the predictions that you're making.
And the last D is deployment.
Now, the other two bullet points talked about times
when you're in that model development or exploration process.
But you can also use Shiny for Python once your model is completely settled on
and you're just deploying it to users.
For instance, a Shiny for Python web app makes an excellent front end
for something like a recommendation system.
And because it's interactive,
it allows your users to have a richer experience with your model
because they're not just getting one static prediction.
So another time that you might consider using Shiny for Python apps
is when you need reactivity.
Now, what is reactivity?
Well, to take a step back,
one thing I think we can all agree on
is that machine learning is computationally expensive.
Whether we're doing training, fine tuning, making inferences,
a lot of the things that we're doing take a lot of computational power.
And so we don't want an app that is going to run top to bottom
every time a user changes something.
Because sometimes, in fact, I might even venture to say oftentimes,
you are going to be doing things that are computationally expensive
when building machine learning apps.
So reactivity basically refers to the fact
that we are going to minimally re-render our apps.
Only things that absolutely need to change and be re-run
are going to be changed in response to user input.
So here's the world's cutest app.
This is looking at a computer vision model
and it's basically allowing you to test out
how different parts of the image are important to the model
by seeing what happens when you completely cover it up.
By the way, the takeaway from this screenshot
is that if the computer vision model can't see the fluffy corgi butt,
it is less confident that the image is a corgi.
Okay, back to the app though.
This has a bunch of user inputs.
For instance, it allows users to upload an image
that they can then use with this app.
When someone uploads an image,
pretty much everything on the right-hand side of this app has to update, right?
We need to update the picture.
We need to update the occluded picture.
And we need to make predictions
both for the unoccluded and the occluded image.
However, if you look at the other inputs,
we can also decide what is going to be occluded in the image,
like what range of pixels are going to be removed.
And when we change that,
we don't need to update the original image
and we don't need to update the model's original prediction
because nothing about our user input actually affects that.
And so we're saving the computational expense of updating that
by using reactivity by saying,
only re-render things that actually need to be re-rendered.
Now, one thing that is really nice about Shiny
is not just that you get reactivity
because that's not unique to Shiny.
One thing that is unique to Shiny is this inferred reactivity.
Inferred reactivity basically refers to the idea
that Shiny is deciding what needs to be re-rendered in your app
based on how you wrote it.
You don't have to think about that at all.
In order to get a deeper idea of what I mean,
let's look at this really silly demo app.
Here we have an app that is plotting a scatterplot
based on a sample of data.
It lets users change various aesthetics.
And then at the bottom left,
it gives you a summary of the sample of your data.
When we have this app,
we basically have a computational graph
that tells you about how all the different parts of the app
are related to each other.
For instance, we start off our app with some data.
And then if we press the action button,
we take a sample of that data.
From that sample, we might rely on the fact
that users are going to choose the color
and what's on the y-axis of our scatterplot.
And using that, we then build our scatterplot.
Then of course, we have that summary table,
which doesn't rely on the y variable for our plot
or the color of the dots in our plot,
but does rely on the sample
that we've randomly taken from our data.
Now, we just built a very simple computational graph.
And you can see that this tells us
how the different parts of the app relate to each other.
For instance, if I update the dot color of my scatterplot,
I have no need to update my summary table.
And that's reflected in my graph.
Only things downstream of changes that we make
need to be updated when that input is updated.
Now, this is an incredibly simple app
and the computational graphs for your apps
as they grow in complexity is going to become
at some point unmanageable
if you had to manage this yourself.
But the good news is that Shiny manages it for you.
So instead of you having to design
and specify the computational graph for your app,
Shiny is inferring what this computational graph should be.
So you get to benefit from reactivity
without having to think about
the computational graph explicitly.
And I know as I build more complicated apps,
I am definitely going to mess up
my computational graph at some point.
So I'm very grateful that Shiny
doesn't even make me think about it.
And you can see with even this Corgi app
that looks pretty simple when you look at it,
the computational graph gets more and more complex
as you add various functionality.
So the last scenario when I think you might want
to use Shiny for Python in your workflow
is when you need scalability.
Now, the nice thing about Shiny for Python
is that it's good for all parts of the process.
It allows you to have a smooth on-ramp
to build really fast, simple,
but really good looking apps.
But it also is there to support you
when that app becomes mission critical
and you have to scale it up
and get it ready for production.
A lot of other web app frameworks
focus on one portion of this process.
There's a lot of great web app tools out there
that allow you to spin up apps incredibly quickly
and get a pretty good looking result.
While others focus specifically
on getting your apps ready for production
when you need a very stable and good looking app
that can be pinged,
pinged, excuse me,
millions of times a day by your users.
But the nice thing about Shiny for Python
is that it really can handle
a lot of these different stages.
For instance, it's great at spinning up really quick apps.
At the last conference,
Joe gave a talk where he mentioned
that the idea for the Shiny framework
basically came to him fully formed
in a blink of an eye upon waking up.
And he really built a web app framework
that allows you to build apps in the same way.
For instance, here's an example
that I use in one of my classes
that is basically a front end for Hangman
and my students are responsible
for building the backend.
And just like Joe,
this came to me as a fully formed idea one morning
and I said,
oh, I want my students to build Hangman today.
And in about an hour,
I was able to spin up this very simple Shiny app
and have something that looked really good,
especially given the fact
that I only had about an hour to spend on it.
And I'm a professor,
I don't have time to build production level web apps.
And using Shiny for Python
allows me to build things like this,
where I had an idea one morning,
I spent a couple of hours building an app
and my students literally used it that afternoon.
And one of the tools that Shiny for Python offers you
is actually something that was mentioned in the last talk,
which is this serverless deployment via Shiny Live.
So this is an example of that app
that I showed you before
with all of the classification models.
And this is something that I've hosted with Shiny Live.
Now, through the magic of WebAssembly and Pyedide,
you can actually have these apps run
in your client's browser
without actually technically hosting the app anywhere.
If you look at the screenshot,
all of the information needed for the app,
like the code, any data that's relevant to the app,
is all encoded and stored
in what is admittedly a very long URL.
But by sending someone that URL,
they're able to run the app in their browser locally.
All they need is that URL and an internet connection.
And what does that mean for you?
Well, as the person deploying this app,
it means no hosting costs
because you're not actually hosting anything.
For your users, that means they do not have to worry
about what I am sure is a dumpster fire
of a Python environment.
If you're anything like me,
they can just run it in their browser
with an internet connection.
If you would like an example of an app hosted
via Shiny Live,
you can use this QR code
in order to access a couple of links
to apps that I've built
and then hosted with Shiny Live.
So as you can see,
Shiny is really great at building quick, easy apps,
but it can also support you
through the process of getting those apps production ready.
For instance, let's say that I build this stock app
that displays various stocks with various user inputs,
and I can build this in about an hour.
But then I can hand this over to a web developer
who can then get it production ready
without having to completely rewrite
everything that already works.
They can just add features as needed
to our computational graph
without completely rewriting what I wrote.
So again, Shiny is there to support you
through the beginning
when you're writing very simple apps,
but it can also support you
when you're ready to take those apps
and put them into production.
Now, one last thing I will say
is that the scalability of Shiny
is not just in the apps,
but also in the skills.
When you build Shiny for Python apps,
you're learning about the Shiny framework,
which is then a skill that is transferable
back and forth to R and back to Python.
All right, I'm almost out of time,
so I will end there.
And all I want to say is,
where do you think Shiny for Python
could fit into your machine learning workflow?
Thank you.
So we have time for one question
until our next speaker sets up.
Do you have a question?
The question is,
what is the feature that you have in Shiny for R
and you miss most from Shiny for Python?
I haven't run into anything
that I feel like is missing
in Shiny for Python yet.
I will say the syntax in Shiny for Python
feels a bit more intuitive to me.
You can see if you go on the website,
there's a really great blog
that compares Shiny for Python
to Shiny for R.
And there's differences in how,
for instance,
we don't have things like isolate,
and we have things like reactive events
that are a little bit different
in terms of syntax.
And I actually find it more intuitive.
So I know that didn't answer your question
because I basically said
I love Shiny for Python.
But that's my answer.
I haven't found anything
that I feel like is missing,
although I know the developers
are working all the time
to expand Shiny for Python.
Let's join me in thanking Chelsea once again.